title: Void Linux vs Arch Linux
author: Curlpipe
description: My thoughts on Void Linux and Arch Linux
---

Very recently, I switched to Void Linux after using Arch for around 2-3 years. 
Arch had started crashing and I couldn't work out why, so I decided to switch it up a bit.
Here's what I liked about each distro and maybe you'll consider making the switch?

## What is Arch Linux?
Arch Linux is a popular distribution that brands itself as "lightweight" and "flexible".
It's considerably minimal when compared to the other distributions and has a DIY attitude.
It's quite an old distro, being created around 2002.

## What is Void Linux?
Void Linux is a lesser known distribution that brands itself as a "stable" and "independent".
It's very minimal and uses software such as Runit and LibreSSL, a rarity in the Linux space.
It is newer, having originated in 2008.

## How do they compare?

| Category      | Void       | Arch    |
| ------------- | ---------- | ------- |
| Popularity    | 42nd       | 17th    |
| ISO Size      | 395M       | 695M    |
| Init          | runit      | systemd |
| SSL           | LibreSSL   | OpenSSL |
| Packages      | Xbps       | Pacman  |
| Release model | Rolling    | Rolling |
| C library     | musl/glibc | glibc   |
| Release date  | 2008       | 2002    |
| Ease of use   | Medium     | Hard    |


## Why should I use Arch Linux?
Arch Linux is great if you fancy a challenge and want to learn more about how Linux operates.
With Arch Linux, you build your very own distro before your eyes, installing all the software
you want. This is great for those who love hacking around but for the average user, it can be
super intimidating.

Arch Linux has a large software repository called the AUR. It has pretty much every bit of
software you could think of, maybe minus a few things. But it's often surprised me just how
much there is. Everything from the nextdns CLI to a compiler for the BASIC language.

Arch Linux also has a great wiki, almost every distros documentation looks feeble against the
great Arch bible.

## Why should I use Void Linux?
Void Linux is a much more lightweight distro, it is almost half of what Arch is.
This may well be due to the software that it uses.

It uses an init system called runit. This is a much lighter alternative to the controversial
systemd. Systemd is said to be very bloated and slow. If you've ever had a "stop job" that
lasts about a minute and a half when you just want to shut down your computer, then that
is systemd. In my adventures in Void, I've found runit to be a lot quicker and it's great how
minimal it is while still being usable. It took a bit to get my head around it but once I
knew it, it was pretty easy. A nice touch is when you sleep your computer by using the `zzz`
command, it will print "zzzz" and when woken up again, will print "yawn". A nice touch!

Void also uses LibreSSL, a completely open source, refactored version of OpenSSL which is
older.

It's also easier to install because it has an installer that can be used to install the base
system in under 2 minutes! Normally setting up an Arch installation would take a few hours
but Void can get up and running very quickly.

Void also provides pre-built isos for people who want a desktop environment pre-installed.

Void feels very much like the playground of Arch but feels more practical.

Void is also more up to date than Arch at times. When I first installed it, the linux kernel
was 2 versions ahead of Arch.

I can't be totally sure, but I remember using Arch and in the first week my system crashed
about 7 times. I managed to sort it out but there were still issues with it. Arch also recently
started to crash almost every 5 minutes. On Void, my system hasn't crashed once. I can say
with little confidence that Void appears to be more stable than Arch. I believe this to be 
because the software on Void is a lot less like large spaghetti code and more simple, refined
and minimal, hence removing opportunities for bugs and making bugs easier to find and destroy.

## Why should I not use Arch Linux?
Arch Linux is quite heavy despite being labelled "lightweight".

It takes a long time to install Arch Linux and you often have to install it multiple times
to get the hang of it. After a while, it can become laborious.

One thing I almost forgot to mention is that it's community is notorious for being elitest
and toxic.

## Why should I not use Void Linux?
The documentation for Void is not great. I spent hours trawling through the documentation
trying to find a certain command. They also have two versions of the wiki, an old and newer one
which can be a bit confusing.

The package management system is great but it just doesn't feel as nice as Arch. They have an
AUR like system but it requires you to clone a github repository and run a bunch of commands.
It's just not practical.

One part of systemd I do miss is systemd-boot. Grub is not as clean as systemd-boot.

## Conclusion
Void felt so refreshing after using Arch for years. It really removes the problems with
Arch and feels so much more liberating and clean. However I can't get over how bad the 
package management system is for software not in the official repositories, I think I'll 
come up with an AUR-like manager for Void. 

Arch served me very well for many years. It's certainly usable as a daily driver and the
size of the community and documentation means that when you have a problem you'll most likely
be able to fix it.

Overall, I give Void a solid 8.5/10

Overall, I give Arch a solid 7.5/10

Sure you can fix your problems with Arch but Void doesn't have problems to begin with.
I hope to have many years on Void Linux and maybe I'll never change distro again.
(That's what I thought with Arch).

In all seriousness, I highly recommend both distros, if you want a challenge and you are a
tinkerer, go for Arch. If you want a more stable, clean and quick to install distro, go for
Void.

## Sources
- https://distrowatch.com
